[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So growing up in
country Australia,
we had chickens in the backyard
and grew a lot of our own
vegetables, and it was a
very, very simple life.
But I was really fortunate
that my parents would
let me go and pick
the parsley for dinner
and collect the eggs,
and the conversations
they would have with me was
always around the nutritional
value of food.
And it obviously
had an impact on me
because I grew up in the
era where fat was the enemy
and carbohydrates were
everybody's friend,
and there was a huge influx of
processed food into the food
supply.
But my parents-- those foods
never really were on offer,
and they would always
explain to me the nutritional
value of food, not about
the calories, where
I felt like the magazines
and everyone else
seemed to be talking about
calories and weight loss.
But I clearly remember Mom,
for example, saying to me,
grab an orange off
the tray because it's
a great source of
vitamin C, and vitamin C
is really good for
your immune system,
and that helps you
prevent colds and flu.
So from an early age, I
had a deep appreciation
that food came from nature and
that we needed it to survive,
but we also needed
it to be really well,
and it really fostered, I guess,
my interest from a really young
age in nourishing food choices.
I think it's a growing problem
for too many communities.
But education, I think, has
to be the first step in people
understanding the value of
making nutritious food choices.
And I feel like
for that to happen,
one of the first things
that we need to do
is change the language
we use around food
because food isn't healthy.
It's humans are
healthy or they're not.
Food is nutritious or it isn't.
And so instead of
saying to people,
you need to eat this
because it's healthy,
right now there's so much
confusion out there--
whether people have access
to amazing fresh food or not.
There's confusion
out there about
whether low-fat cheese is
healthy or kale is healthy.
Well, if we bring the concept
back to will this nourish me,
if people could ask that
question before they
ate anything, and as
long as they mostly
moved in the direction of
making nourishing choices,
I feel like it would help
people in certain communities
request more of the
food service providers.
I also think that we make time
for whatever we prioritize.
So when people say to me,
I don't have time to cook,
what they're really saying
is cooking my dinner isn't
a priority for me right now.
And I think we need to
say it how it really
is and try that on and see if
we're comfortable with that.
So we do whatever we prioritize
and we do whatever we value.
So if we are in that situation
where it is a seemingly food
desert, we always find-- you
can find a way if it's something
that you value.
So whether it's traveling
a distance to buy in bulk
and coming home and then
freezing some of that food--
a lot of nutrients aren't
actually destroyed in freezing.
You could cook up big batches of
soups and stews and casseroles
and have that there
and ready to go.
So I feel like there are ways
around people who struggle
to get access to fresh produce.
I have immense empathy
for that, as well,
because it's not
an easy situation.
But I do think that we can make
our way when it's something
that we value.
So whenever I'm working with
someone around their food,
I come at it from a
three-pillar approach--
the biochemical, the
nutritional, and the emotional.
So the emotional component,
part of that is helping people
understand why they
do what they do
even though they know
what they know, because
for a lot of people these
days, it's not actually
a lack of education that
leads them to polish off
a packet of chocolate
biscuits after dinner.
A lot of people today
aren't doing that thinking,
I'm going to feel so
fabulous after I smash these.
It's often we don't
understand why we do it.
So if you can
answer the question
"food is," finish
the sentence, you'll
start to get an
insight about what
food is really about for you.
And an athlete-- every time
you say that to an athlete,
they finish it with
the word "fuel."
It's there for performance.
It's there to enhance what
their body is capable of doing.
If you say it to
someone like me,
my answer is always
nourishment, and that's mostly
in the physical realm.
So it's about vitamins and
minerals and antioxidants
and all those good things
that only food can give us.
But when you ask someone
who eats emotionally
to finish that sentence "food
is," nearly always there'll
be a highly emotive word at
the end of that sentence.
It might be "comfort"
or "pleasure" or "joy."
And whenever you've
got it linked
to a really strong
emotion, if you don't have
any other avenues to
experience that emotion,
then regular over
eating or making
food choices that don't
support your health
becomes a quick fix to
changing how we feel.
So I think we've got to
take it further these days
because they're definitely,
of course, has to be accurate
education.
People have to know
really what food is
and what's in their food.
The information they receive
has got to be accurate.
But I find that education
alone is not always
enough to lead people
to behavioral change.
Getting insight into why
they do what they do is key.
So my approach has three
pillars to it-- the biochemical,
the nutritional,
and the emotional.
And I actually went to
uni for 14 years, which
I know makes me
sound really thick
and like I probably
failed everything,
but I loved learning
very much and still do.
So I originally studied
nutrition and dietetics
and then went on and did
a PhD in biochemistry--
so a huge amount of science
back there in my learning.
And it's still the
foundation of what I share.
But when I was doing
that PhD in biochemistry,
I had all of the biochemical
pathways that go on
inside the human
body, I had them all
mapped out on great big
pieces of paper Blu Tack
to my bedroom walls.
It was the only way I was
ever going to learn it.
And when you see the body
mapped out like that,
you get the deepest appreciation
for the absolute miracle
that we are.
But you also get the
deepest appreciation
for the critical role nutrients
play every moment of our lives.
So the way to understand
a biochemical reaction
that essentially creates how
we feel, how we function,
how we look--
everything about us is
created by the billions
of reactions that go on
inside of us every second.
So let's just look at one.
One reaction might
be substance A
is going to be converted
into substance B. That's
one reaction.
Then B will become
C, C becomes D,
and on and on the
cascade of change goes.
But for substance A to
turn into substance B,
you need nutrients to
fire that reaction.
So let's say you need
magnesium and vitamin B6.
If you're deficient in
either or both of those,
then substance A
will accumulate,
and then you won't have
enough substance B. And maybe
when you've got the right amount
of substance A in your blood,
there's no problem.
But when it accumulates,
it behaves more
like a poison to your body.
It's more of a problem.
And now you don't have
enough substance B,
and maybe you need
substance B for great sleep,
restorative sleep, great energy,
a happy, calm, even mood,
or to use your body fat
effectively as a fuel.
So in other words, when we
become nutritionally deficient,
there are consequences to that.
But we're not really taught
to see our bodies like that.
When we have things that
come up with our health
or parts of our body
that frustrate us--
it might be body fat that
sticks to us in places
that we don't understand, lousy
energy, or poor quality sleep.
It's just feedback.
The body doesn't have a
voice, but it will always
give us communication.
It will always give
us messages to let
us know whether it's happy
or not, and it's up to us
to decipher those messages.
So if we can see them as gifts
asking us to eat, drink, move,
think, breathe, believe,
or perceive in a new way,
you can see the body
as your best friend
and as this vehicle
that supplies you
with messages, guiding you to
have an even more amazing life.
So when we understand that
that's the biochemistry driving
how we feel and function
and look inside of us,
it changes, then,
the second pillar
in my approach, the nutritional
one, because we obviously
need nutrients to drive
all those reactions.
So instead of food being
this pain in the neck thing
that, oh, I know I
need to do it better
or I need to eat more vegetables
because an expert told me to,
it's not a she told me to,
so, therefore, I have to.
It comes from a
place of, well, I
understand that the Brassica
family of vegetables
contains substances that
really support phase two liver
detoxification
biochemical pathways.
I'm going to choose
that broccoli
because it helps me detoxify
estrogens and pesticides.
So the choice comes from
a place of deep self-care
rather than I read about
it, that they're important,
and I probably should do it.
And we're more likely
to make sustained change
from that place.
And then the third
pillar, of course,
is the emotional
where I help people
understand why they
do what they do
when they know what they know.
So science suggests that
humans have been on the planet
for about 150,000 years.
And I get people to visualize
that as a 30-centimeter school
ruler.
So that's 150,000 years.
Now, 1 millimeter
on that school ruler
represents 500 years in that
enormous amount of time.
So if we fast forward to today
or even consider the last 20
years and we look at
the rate of change
that we have asked our
bodies to actually undergo
in this modern world, it is
a rate of change like never
before.
And if you put it in context
of the enormous amount of time
that we've been
on the planet, it
is not even a pinprick
amount of time in its size.
So if we look at the fact
that social media's only just
over 10 years old, it
wasn't that long ago
when we left the house, no
one could get hold of us.
We look at the food supply,
the dramatic change that
has gone on there with the
huge amount of processed foods
and artificial substances
that have infiltrated the food
supply in the very recent past.
So these things
are so new to us.
And for many
people, their bodies
haven't yet adapted,
if they ever will.
They've yet adapted to be
able to cope with the way
that we're living, and
stress is certainly
one of those scenarios.
So every generation, of
course, has had stress.
Many generations
have had trauma.
Sadly, that continues
in the world today.
But if we look at
people's everyday lives
and we look at what leads people
to make stress hormones today,
it's not the tiger coming
out of the jungle at us
or someone from another tribe
chasing us with their spear.
It's not those,
usually, thankfully,
those physical
threats to our life.
What leads us to make things
like adrenaline and cortisol
today--
block your ears-- is
caffeine and our perception
of pressure and urgency.
Now, I choose those
words very carefully
because we can tend to forget
that pressure and urgency is
a perception.
We actually choose to
see our day like that.
And what so many
people have done
is made their email inbox
full of stress and pressure
and urgency and
their to-do list.
And when we wake
up in the morning
and we see our day as difficult
or we see that everything
is urgent when maybe in reality
two things are actually urgent,
we put ourselves
into what's called
sympathetic nervous system
dominance, which is essentially
the fight or flight
response, and it's adrenaline
driving that.
So when we produce all
of that adrenaline,
because it communicates what
adrenaline has communicated
for 150,000 years, for that
whole 30-centimeter school
ruler, it changes our
biochemistry on the inside
because it literally thinks
our life is in danger,
so it prepares us to get away.
So the first thing it does is
elevate our blood pressure,
which is an ongoing
problem for so many adults
in the Western world.
It changes where our
blood supply is directed.
So normally blood
supply is fantastic
to our digestive system.
But it gets diverted
away to the periphery,
to the arms and the legs to
power to get out of danger.
And the third-- and
it does many things--
but the third and another very
powerful thing that adrenaline
does is it changes the fuel
that your body perceives
it is safe to use.
So in any given
moment, the body is
making a decision
which fuel to use,
and it can only use glucose or
fat or a combination of both.
And when your body
is on red alert
thinking it's got to get
out of danger quickly,
it needs a fast-burning
fuel to power it to do that.
So take a wild guess
between glucose and fat
which is the preferred
fuel source in that moment.
It's glucose.
So I have literally
met thousands of people
in the almost 20 years that I've
been working with people one
on one who have lost the ability
to effectively use their body
fat as a fuel because
they're always
relying on their glucose because
of stress hormone production.
The next thing that
happens when we're always
in that stressed-out
place-- that's
essentially phase one of stress,
which is high adrenaline.
But because with
high adrenaline,
it creates a lot of
inflammation in the body.
Now, the body knows that
inflammation is the beginning
of most degenerative disease.
So it's trying to
keep you alive.
So it needs to dampen
down that inflammation.
And because, historically,
adrenaline production
was short lived-- we
escaped from the danger,
we won the fight, whatever
happened happened,
but it was short lived.
And now that you've been making
adrenaline for the last year
or decade, the
body says, well, I
can't sustain this
level of inflammation.
I now need to go into the
second stage of stress,
which is when your
cortisol starts to elevate.
Now, historically for
the 150,000 years,
cortisol has communicated
to every cell in the body
that there's no food
left in the world
because the only chronic stress
humans historically had were
floods and famines and wars.
And so if you had a bit
more flesh on your bones,
you're more likely to get
through this supposed famine
that you're part of.
But in modern times,
our long-term stress
tends to be around our
financial concerns, relationship
concerns.
It might be health concerns or
the health concerns of a loved
one.
For a lot of people,
it's their weight.
Their first waking thought in
the morning is, what will I
or won't I eat today, how much
exercise can I get done today,
and I can live in this
perpetual state of never feeling
like their body is OK and
enough the way that it is.
So the stress can
come from many places.
But when we're producing
excessive amounts of cortisol,
its job is to slow
your metabolism down
to get you through a famine.
And so your clothes get tighter.
And what's most
people's response
when their clothes get tighter.
They think, oh, I
better go on a diet.
And if you go on
a diet, you tend
to eat less, which just confirms
to your body what it perceives
is true, which is that there's
no food left in the world.
And so it slows your
metabolism even further.
And that's one tiny little
reason why diets don't work.
It's why honing in and focusing
on supporting why the body is
making cortisol in
the first place,
supporting the health
of the adrenal glands
where you make these stress
hormones from is essential.
And then the third
stage of stress
when we stay in that very busy,
intense, everything's full
of pressure and urgency,
when we stay in that place,
you can go into what we call
stage three stress, which
is when the adrenal glands
can no longer sustain
that level of cortisol output.
And it's really become
known as adrenal fatigue.
And when you wake
up in the morning,
you feel like you've
been hit by a bus.
The fatigue is deep
and relentless.
So the consequences of
being intensely busy
and perceiving all that pressure
and urgency in our lives,
the long-term
consequences of that
are deeply concerning to me.
And it also doesn't
have to be that way
because if we pause for a
minute and consider what
the real currency of health
is, I believe it's energy,
and for too long
it's been weight.
But when we stop and
think about energy,
when we don't have energy,
everything is more difficult.
When you're tired,
it impacts the foods
that you choose, whether
you get off the couch
and go for a walk or not, the
jobs that you would apply for,
the friends that you
make, your self-talk,
and the way you speak to
everyone you love in the world.
So when we wake up in the
morning and we're exhausted,
what do most people
do about that?
They reach for a coffee.
Now, that doesn't
fix why they're
tired in the first place.
So my point is, most
people don't do anything
about lousy energy.
They blame it on their life.
They blame it on the fact that
they work full time and study
part time, and they're
raising three children
and have a relationship
that they want to maintain,
and they might
have aging parents,
and I remember a lady
once saying to me,
and I have to catch
airplanes for work,
and airplanes don't
wait, you know?
And when people describe
what is essentially
a really privileged life
as being really difficult,
I know they don't really
mean the complaint
that I can hear in their voice.
They're just
exhausted, and there's
nothing left for them
at the end of that.
And the sadness
for me in that is
that so many people have
stopped letting themselves have
what they already have.
So if you don't
let yourself have
what is right in front
of you-- a majestic view,
watching your children
sleep, the fact
that when you turn
the tap on the water
doesn't make you sick.
So when we lose touch with
what is right here, right now,
and the gifts of all of
that, I feel like I always
want to say to people, what
else are you denying yourself?
What else are you
depriving yourself of?
Because when you speak
to people who are dying
and you ask them
what they're going
to miss the most
in the world, they
say the most ordinary things--
their partner's
face, the feeling
of their dog's fur
under their hands,
the smell of a freshly cut
lemon, or the night sky.
And we have all
of that right now.
So for me, a big part of
health is letting yourself have
what you already have.
It's what joy is all
about, and joy gives us
an irreplaceable
depth of energy.
And the more we connect
to that, the more
we spend time across what is--
I'm not denying
they're not busy days.
But the more we connect to the
joy that is always available,
even when there's really
tough stuff going on,
the better supported
your nervous system is,
the better the nutrients
get around your body.
The way you breathe changes.
What you focus on
is what you feel.
That changes.
So just those micro
pauses throughout the day
or having that background
sound of I'm so fortunate
and I'm so grateful can be game
changing for people's health.
For me, "stressed" is really
the achiever's word for fear
because it's kind of not
OK in this day and age
to walk around going I'm
really scared of that,
I'm really scared of that.
But when people share with me
what they're stressed about,
if I pull the curtains back on
that, what I'll actually see
is what they're frightened of.
They're frightened of
letting people down.
They're frightened of how
other people see them.
So if we can actually,
in those moments
where we feel really worked
up and really stressed,
if we can pause there and think,
what am I really worried about,
it's not actually
about running late
or it's not actually about
not replying to that email
promptly.
It's nearly always
about how we perceive
people are going to see us.
So if we can pause and
catch ourself in that,
you can create a new story
around that and think,
well, I know them, they
know me better than that,
and you can reframe
it and start afresh.
On a physical level, when we're
in sympathetic nervous system
dominance, when we're in
that red zone in that fight
or flight response, the
only thing science currently
knows that will
get us out of that
is to extend the length
of our exhalation.
So the other arm of
the nervous system
is called the parasympathetic
nervous system.
It's the rest, digest,
repair, reproduce arm
of the nervous system.
And from that place, our body
is able to work so incredibly
efficiently.
We're able to use our body
fat effectively as a fuel,
and it's simply
because it's getting
the message via
the nervous system
that it is safe to do all
of those key processes,
including use our
body fat as a fuel.
So to come out of
those stress places,
I do think people have to
be honest with themselves
about how caffeine affects them.
I think we need to explore
our perception of pressure
and urgency and save it
for when we really need it,
not make what is just a busy
or opportunity-filled day
full of pressure
and urgency, and we
need to become breath aware.
So essentially what
I mean by that is we
need to diaphragmatically
breathe.
So when you breathe in
through your nostrils,
with the inhalation, your
tummy starts to stick out.
And then there's a gentle pause
at the end of that inhalation,
and then you slowly exhale--
again, through your nostrils.
And your belly comes back
in towards your spine.
And if you can really slow
that style of breathing down,
your body gets the message
via your nervous system
that you're safe.
Now, obviously we
all have to breathe,
but it's reminding
ourselves to become
breath aware through a
potentially busy day.
So you might start with
a breath focus practice,
whether it's yoga,
meditation, Pilates, Tai Chi.
If none of those
things appeal, it
might just be
going to the window
or going outside, placing your
hands on top of your tummy
and thinking of the things
that you're grateful for.
It might be every time you're
stopped at red traffic lights,
instead of checking social media
or sending emails, you actually
breathe diaphragmatically.
When you boil the kettle
first thing in the morning
to make warm water and
lemon juice, of course,
you stand there and
breathe diaphragmatically--
so just taking those micro
pauses throughout the day
to check in with
your breath and just
commit to becoming
more breath aware.
The more time we spend in
that diaphragmatic breathing
place, the more supported our
nervous system is going to be.
So there's incredible
technology now being
developed where you can swallow
a camera that's actually
the size of a little,
tiny vitamin capsule,
and it gives you about
15 hours of footage
from inside the
digestive system.
So it totally spins my tires.
The visuals you get are amazing.
And what the researchers did was
they gave one group of people
a homemade meal.
They actually made
noodles from scratch
just from flour and
water and served it
in a broth made from water and
vegetables and salt and pepper.
And then the other
group, they were
given bought noodles
from the supermarket that
come with the sachet that
you add hot water to,
and that was served with a blue
drink, a blue sports drink.
And then they
swallowed these cameras
to give the visuals
of what then went on.
And four hours after they
swallowed the real food meal,
all that was left was white
fluff in the digestive system.
And that's how it's
supposed to be,
really well broken
down by that stage.
But for the people who had
the bought food meal, four
hours after they ate it
and swallowed the camera,
you can still see the
teeth marks in the noodles.
So what that suggests
is if you have
food in your digestive system
for four hours exposed to all
of your digestive enzymes and
it hasn't been broken down,
it suggests that maybe
there are substances in some
of these processed foods that we
have no ability to break down.
Now, our food is where
our energy comes from.
So why on earth would we
want to mess with that?
But then further to
that, the blue drink
had actually dyed
the noodles blue.
And so the dye in the
blue drink was actually
derived from
petroleum, and there's
nothing inside the
human body that
allows us to break down petrol.
And as ludicrous as that sounds,
sadly that's our reality today.
And when we think about
150,000 years that humans
have been on the
planet, we've been
exposed to these things for
a drop in the ocean of time.
So a number of artificial
substances and colors
and sweeteners are created
synthetically, and some
of the substances that
they're derived from,
I have concerns about
whether they even
belong in the human body.
So when it comes to
gluten and grains,
I think there are
a lot of people now
who might be suspicious
that they're potentially
causing a problem for them,
especially with their gut.
They might notice
after they have
a sandwich that
their tummy bloats
and they're curious about
whether it's causing that.
And so the path
for a lot of people
is to check in with their
medical professional,
and the only test
we really currently
have in conventional medicine
for gluten sensitivity
is the one for celiac disease.
And if that's negative, I
think that a lot of people
then think, oh, well,
it mustn't be that.
It must be something
else that I'm eating
or maybe I'm stressed
and that's what's
causing the gut problems.
But I think it's really
important for people
to consider that technology
advances sometimes rapidly,
but sometimes really
slowly, and what
if there are 800 different
mechanisms through which
the human body can react to
gluten or other substances
in grains?
Your body is your barometer.
So if you start to pay
attention to the foods
that you think might
be causing a problem,
you need to trust that.
You have this incredible
wisdom inside yourself.
You want to listen to that.
And the only way
to really know is
to take a break from those
foods for a period of time.
If you leave them
out long term, I
do think it's wise to consult
with the health professional
to make sure you're not missing
out on potential nutrients
that you might need.
But you'll get your answer if
you eliminate the food that you
are suspicious of, and
if you feel better,
there's your answer, or you
can bring it back and see
if the symptoms come back.
But my point is that there are
only so many tests we currently
have in the world, and there
are potentially many more
mechanisms of gluten sensitivity
that we don't yet understand,
and eventually technology
will catch up with that.
I also think it's
really important
to consider human history.
So where we've come from
guides us, to some degree,
about the food choices
that we need to make.
So if you consider people of
Irish heritage, up until 1845,
the major source
of starch for them,
essentially, was potatoes.
But then the potato famine
hit, and they grew crops
on a large scale really for the
first time in their history.
Now, there's a really
strong genetic line
for autoimmune diseases,
including celiac disease,
down that Irish bloodline.
But when you think
about it, they've
only really been eating
grains for about seven
or eight generations.
And again, that's a drop
in the ocean of time
to expose your digestive
system to a brand-new food.
So my question
always is, do we have
the equipment
inside of ourselves
to break some of
these foods down?
And the answer is potentially
highly individual.
But what I've seen in my
clinical practice over nearly
20 years is that there are many
people who benefit enormously
with their physical health,
with their happiness,
with their performance,
with their strength,
just with how robust they
feel in life when they make
a change to how they
eat that actually serves
their own individual needs.
So I have deep concerns
for children's nutrition.
And at the moment in
the Western world,
there are about 42
million obese children
between the ages
of zero and five.
Now, as adults, we are
responsible for that.
And I don't say that to elicit
guilt. It's just how it is.
They're too little to make
their own food choices.
We are their guiding
lights with that.
And my concern
with that is, if we
stay on that trajectory,
those numbers, by 2025,
are going to be somewhere
up around 70 million.
But also, the children right now
between zero and five who are
obese--
common sense and science
shows that if you're
obese as a child,
you're more likely to be
obese as a teenager.
Now, for a woman,
for a girl, even
for boys, the more
body fat you have,
the more estrogen your body
makes because your body
fat cells are one of the
production units for estrogen.
So the more body fat we have
or the larger those cells,
the more estrogen we make.
So when children have
higher levels of body fat
at younger and younger ages,
their whole endocrine system,
their whole hormonal system,
is being flooded with estrogen
at an age that is
just too young.
And the number of
girls who are starting
to menstruate now at
younger and younger ages
is deeply concerning.
So when we talk about
obesity and when
we talk about the
highly processed foods,
the refined sugars,
the refined starches,
the artificial sweeteners and
colors and flavorings that
are in food, all
of those things are
contributing to that
enormous challenge
that we are facing
on this planet.
And it's not just
the obesity itself.
It's the consequences of
that because we don't want
those precious young people--
they're babies themselves.
We don't want them to have
a baby at such a young age.
It's deeply concerning to me.
So when it comes to artificial
sweeteners and colors
and preservatives,
we need to pause
and bring common sense
back to that conversation
because, as a race
of people, we've
been exposed to these substances
for the tiniest amount of time.
So we actually don't
really understand
what is going to happen
inside of our bodies
when we're exposed to
these things every day
decade after decade.
There's a big
question mark there.
If you knew who
you truly are, you
would be in awe of yourself.
And I feel like most people
live their lives completely out
of touch with that.
If you lived your life
even a tiny bit more
in touch with that, it
would change your choices.
So our health is
essentially made up
of hundreds if not
thousands of choices
that we make across a day.
Will I go back for seconds
after dinner tonight?
Wine or water this evening?
Will I stay back at work or
will I go home to my family?
Will I go to bed or
do some more emails?
One biscuit or six?
So the questions, the
choices that we're faced with
are consistent and
almost never ending
when it comes to our health.
So we want to make more choices
in the direction of taking care
of ourself and fewer
choices towards things
that take away from our health.
So when we are more
in touch really
with how precious life is,
when we live our lives in touch
with what we were
born knowing, which
is that each and every one of
us are special, when you live
your life in touch with
that, it changes the choices
that you make because
you want to take
care of this physical
structure that you've
been given to have this
extraordinary experience called
life.
So I want everyone living
their lives more in touch
with how precious they are.
For every single human,
their greatest fear
is that they are not enough.
And if they aren't enough,
then they won't be loved.
There is not a human
that escapes that,
and its psychology 101.
So what that means
is when we're babies,
we believe in our autonomic
nervous system, the part
that we can't govern
with our thoughts,
the part we can't instruct.
We believe it deeply in that
autonomic nervous system
that love is essential
for our survival
because, as small
human babies, it is.
Someone has to care
enough about us
to give us food and
clothing and shelter.
We can't get those
things on our own.
Other animal species can do
it from day one by themselves.
But we can't.
So it is there in
our DNA from the day
we are born that love is
essential for our survival.
But we know as adults that
a life with love in it
is delicious and
soul nourishing,
but we can actually
live without it
because we can obtain our own
food and clothing, and shelter.
But for most people, they
live their whole life
believing that love is still
essential for survival,
and it drives their
behavior hugely.
And here's the best
way I've come to be
able to explain that so far.
So when we are little, from
an emotional maturation
perspective, we are
what's called egocentric.
Sadly, some people
maybe never change.
But all that really means is
that when you're egocentric,
you believe that you're
the center of the universe.
So you believe that the way that
people are in your environment,
you believe they are the
way they are because of you.
So when they're happy, you link
it in your mind immediately,
not consciously-- it's
wired in your nervous system
immediately.
That's because I
just told a joke.
That's because I just did a
beautiful finger painting.
And so parts of your
personality are born from that.
The observations you make
on people's faces that light
them up, you link it
to your own behavior.
However, sadly,
the same thing also
happens when the people
in your environment
are dissatisfied or unhappy.
You link it to you.
So before the age of seven--
again, it's basic psychology.
Before the age of seven,
every single human
has created a belief in
their own deficiency,
and we do it to make
sense of our environment.
So let's say normally when
your dad comes home from work,
the first thing he does is
picks you up and plays with you.
You're four years old.
You love it.
You look forward to it.
And then one day,
he doesn't do that
and you're sent to your room.
And you can hear
he and your mother
having an intense
conversation in the kitchen.
There's raised voices.
There's fist banging
on the table.
And you don't understand it
other than that it feels yucky
in your nervous system.
Your brain, in that
moment, is looking
for an explanation for this
scenario because it's brand new
and it's uncomfortable for you.
And we can't look
into their world
and see that dad's behaving
with such intensity
because he was
just made redundant
and now he doesn't
know how on earth he's
going to pay for your education.
So the expression
"with intensity"
is actually out of deep
love and care for you.
You can't see that
when you're egocentric.
All you know is that
it feels uncomfortable.
And the only way your brain can
make sense of what's going on
is to begin to
believe that there's
something wrong with you.
But the trick is that
we're not taught to see
our brain as a meaning maker.
We're not taught to see
that nothing in the world
has meaning unless
we give it meaning.
So because we don't
understand that
and we're not aware
that we've just
created a belief that we're not
good enough, not tall enough,
not pretty enough, not thin
enough, not smart enough, just
not enough the way that we
are, because we don't realize
we've just absorbed that belief
from our environment, what then
happens is you go looking
for evidence of your beliefs
everywhere.
There's a part of our brain
called the reticular activating
system that hunts
those things down,
hunts our beliefs out to
show us that they're true.
So if you think that
people can't be trusted,
you will look for evidence of
how that is true everywhere,
and you'll miss all the
examples of how it's not true.
If you believe that there
aren't enough hours in the day,
that will be your experience.
You'll live your life
with such intensity--
there aren't enough
hours in a day--
whereas the person who sits
at the desk beside you,
they might have 50 more things
on their to-do list each day,
but they cruise through the
day, and they get more done,
and that's because they believe
that the important things
always get done.
So your beliefs create
your experience.
You know what it's like when you
suddenly want to buy a new car.
Pick on a red hatchback.
Don't you see them
everywhere when
you think that that's
the one you want to buy?
Well, there's not suddenly more
red hatchbacks on the road.
They've always been there.
All you've done is primed
the reticular activating
system in your brain
to go looking for them.
If you're a female,
you tend to go,
oh, it's a sign
I better get one.
But the same is true
with your beliefs.
You look for evidence of your
not enoughness everywhere.
And so because you're constantly
scratching the itch of that not
enoughness, it holds you back.
It holds you back from
the truth of who you are.
It holds you back.
You lose touch with what
you were born knowing,
which is that you're
capable of anything.
So until we begin to
explore our beliefs--
we all have beliefs
that are great for us.
But many people-- most people
have beliefs that limit them
until they go and explore this.
And when you begin to
pull the curtains back
on those limiting
beliefs, you start
to see that really
where they've come from
is a great big story
you told yourself
to try to make
sense of something
that you found uncomfortable
when you were little.
So when you look at them with
adult eyes, you can see them,
and you can see the benefit
that will have come from them,
and there might be lovely
aspects in your personality
that have been
created from that,
but you can now
see, as an adult,
that they're actually
now holding you
back from the life you were
destined to live, from the life
that you were destined,
that you're called for
to serve your bigger purpose,
because if you believe
you aren't enough, you'll never
believe that you have enough,
and you'll live your
whole life always
in the pursuit of having.
And it's time to change that
conversation because surely it
is all really
about contribution.
I think we can get
really caught up
in the doing of everyday
life, and we often
don't pause to reflect
what really lights us up,
what really nourishes our soul.
I meet so many people who want
to know what their purpose is,
and they can't find it.
They don't even know
where to start looking.
And My advice always
to those people
is forget worrying
about your purpose.
Find out what you care about.
But here's the kicker.
You've got to take action on it.
So when you start to take
action on what you care about--
because there are things
in the world right now
that are unacceptable.
And when you have
a fire inside you
that recognizes that
that's unacceptable,
that's your soul
calling you to action.
So if you take action on those
things, on what you actually
care about and making
a difference in there,
you'll forget about your
purpose, but I bet you find it.
So when you wake
up in the morning,
if you can ask the
question, how can I
best serve today, how can
I best be of service today,
it shifts the genre
of your whole life.
It changes the way--
it changes the
questions you ask.
It changes the
choices that you make,
the actions that you take,
and your most important thing
on this planet, your
purpose on this planet
might be to raise a happy
and healthy and well-adjusted
child.
Your purpose on
this planet might
be to pick up litter
every time you
see it because that,
in the long term,
is game changing for the planet.
It doesn't have to be
big, off-the-charts,
dreamlike sequences that
you need to bring to life.
For some people, it is that, and
that's magical and breathtaking
and an honor to witness.
But what is just as
big an honor to witness
are parents who love and
adore their children so much
that they're raising
those children
to know that they are
enough because when you know
you are enough, you stop
worrying about having and
having enough and
you live your life
in service in complete
contribution to others.
I think a huge key to
fulfillment is service.
I feel that we might think we've
overcome worrying about what
other people think of us, but
if you pull the curtains back
on a lot of your
choices, you'll probably
see that you probably do
still worry about what
other people think of you.
And if you can pause
in those moments
and see that you don't need to
worry about that, that they're
there for the long haul,
that they love you,
they respect you-- and actually,
if they don't, then maybe they
don't belong in your life.
And if we can move beyond
worrying about what others
think of us and live
our life in service,
the fulfillment that comes
with that is indescribable.
Now, that can be
on a massive scale.
That can be on a tiny scale.
It actually does
matter because it's
what your soul is called for.
I feel like the conversations
around spirituality
are so often about
ego and about oneness
and the division of those two.
And the peace and
the joy that comes
with connecting to what is is
obviously far more conducive
to amazing health, to
service, to fulfillment
than responding consistently
from the ego, which
is so worried about how
other people see us.
But I want to take the
conversation a step further
and bring in the concept of
our essence and essentially
our soul because we are
all here with a uniqueness.
We are all here with
many gifts inside of us
that we have this incredible
opportunity to bring to life,
and you don't want to miss that.
You don't want to miss
this opportunity called
life, whatever that looks like.
But to do that, to call into
action what you are here
to do and contribute
that essence in you,
you have to have
great physical health,
because without our
health, we have nothing.
And you don't want it to be a
health crisis that wakes you up
to teach you that.
You know in your
own heart when you
need to make some different
choices when it comes
to how you look after yourself.
You don't need me to sit
here and say, you probably
need to eat a bit less sugar.
You already know in your
own heart if you do that.
What I care about is what
stops you taking action
on what you know to be true when
it comes to your food choices,
when it comes to how you
speak to the people you love
the most in the
world, and when it
comes to how you bring your
purpose in this world to life.
They all feed each other.
You almost can't have
one without the other.
And the purpose is so
breathtaking to witness
when we have extraordinary
health and energy.
One of the most beautiful
things I think we witness
is when the light is really
on in someone's eyes.
And when that light is there,
their body is nourished,
their soul is nourished,
and they're usually
living their life on purpose.
And I want people to be aware
of the ripple effect of that.
What's life like when you
come into contact with someone
that has that light,
that amazing energy?
You can't not be affected by it.
So when we step up and take
even better care of ourselves,
it doesn't just impact us.
It impacts every single person
we come into contact with.
And it's that ripple effect
that I am obsessed about
because when we are
looking after ourselves,
whatever that looks like
for us-- food, nourishment,
movement, great sleep, exposure
to the beautiful sunshine that
we have and living a
life of contribution--
when you have those aspects
that are alive in your life,
the way you interact
with everyone
is so different if those
things aren't occurring.
So don't ever think that
it is selfish to nourish
yourself, to take
time out, to go
for a walk barefoot on the
sand, and to find that purpose
and follow it and trust
yourself and back yourself.
That's not selfish.
That's necessary more
than ever at this time
on the planet because
of the ripple effect
that you then generate
from the aliveness
that you demonstrate to others.
My mission is to
educate and inspire,
enhancing people's
health and happiness,
igniting a ripple effect
that transforms the world.
And I don't say that lightly.
I say that because
I've witnessed it now
in thousands of people.
When that light comes
on, the ripple effect
of their choices, of the way
they speak to other people
is game changing
for those others.
I think one of the
most important changes
that certainly I care about
right now on this planet
is reminding people of what they
already know in their hearts,
and that is that
life is so precious
and that they are
precious and that they
need to treat
themselves accordingly.
The human body is
so extraordinary.
We're actually made up of
about 50 trillion cells, which
is a number that can
so easily go over
our heads with its enormity.
So let me use time as an
example to demonstrate
the enormity of that.
So one million seconds
ago was 12 days ago.
One billion seconds
ago was 32 years ago.
But one trillion seconds
ago was 32,000 years ago.
Now, you have about 50 trillion
cells that make you up.
So the best way to picture
that is 50 trillion
tiny, little circles, and they
all want to talk to each other.
But the only way
they can communicate
is when there are
nutrients present.
And I have grave concerns that
there are just too many people
not getting the
nutrients that are
essential for very basic
cell-to-cell communication.
We are essentially the
health of our cells.
Now, because of incredible
advances in the world,
we are living a lot longer.
Our life expectancy has
almost doubled since 1900.
However, a big
question to ponder
is, are we living too
short and dying too long?
So we still want to be
able to bend over and do up
our own shoelaces in the
second half of our life.
You don't want your tummy to
have gotten so big that you can
no longer reach your
feet or your spine
to have become so
inflexible that you
can no longer get to your toes.
When you talk to people
who can no longer put
on their own shoes, they regret
the choices in the first half
of their life very much.
So the choices we
make today don't just
impact how we feel
and function today.
They're going to impact what
that entire future looks like.
And the power to change that is
in your hands and in your hands
only.
No one else can do it for you.
It's just that you have
to believe that you're
worth taking care of.